RECOMMENDED PLAN
============================================================================================================================================================================================================

6.1 Plan Description
--------------------

The recommended plan, shown in *Figure 6‑1*, is described below.

#### 6.1.1 Reach 1 Recommended Plan

Although cost estimates showed the Minimum Crossing Improvement and
Maintenance alternative to be more expensive, this plan is recommended
at West 72^nd^ Avenue. The easements needed to implement the 100-yr
Conveyance Alternative are not feasible given the residential lots in
this area.

The channel grading in the Woodland Valley No. 7 subdivision associated
with the 100-yr Conveyance Plan is included in the recommended plan. The
residential buildings currently in the regulatory 100-year floodplain
can be removed by the proposed project.

#### 6.1.2 Reach 2 Recommended Plan

The Minimum Crossing Improvement and Maintenance Plan is recommended for
Reach 2. While the other two alternative plans remove additional
buildings from the floodplain, the additional benefits associated with
those alternatives do not justify the added cost. The Minimum Crossing
Improvement Plan will address the Zone X shaded flood hazard area by
preventing the spill flows that creates the shallow flooding at Alkire
Street. This alternative will not have any impact on the proposed Ward
Road expansion trail or roadway crossing at Leyden Creek.

#### 6.1.3 Reach 3 Recommended Plan

The recommended plan for Reach 3 includes the 100-yr Conveyance Plan
crossing structure at Indiana Street and the Croke Canal, but does not
include the overflow channel west of Cameo Estates. The overflow channel
was not included as it would not directly mitigate any flood hazards.

At the Croke Canal, the proposed improvement will convey the 100-yr
discharge underneath the canal, minimizing the comingling flows,
eliminating the need for the passive weir structure. During final
design, an additional flood control purge structure should be
investigated to determine the feasibility between the City of Arvada and
the Croke Canal representatives.

#### 6.1.4 Reach 4 Recommended Plan

No improvements are recommended at Leyden Lake. Improving Leyden Lake to
contain the 100-yr design storm only impacts a short reach of Leyden
Creek immediately downstream of the spillway. The first roadway crossing
at Indiana Street is not affected in size if any improvements to Leyden
Creek are proposed. Although no roadway crossings would be impacted, the
Farmers’ High Line Canal would be impacted. Any flows that are
discharged over the emergency spillway are intercepted by the Farmers’
High Line Canal. Flows through the primary spillway do not influence the
Farmers’ High Line Canal.

The Minimum Crossing Improvement and Maintenance Plan is recommended
plan for Quaker Street. The benefit cost analysis determined the
additional work associated with channelization of Leyden Creek through
this stretch was not equivalent to the additional cost. Any trail
crossing near Quaker Street will be further evaluated during Conceptual
Design.

The Minimum Crossing Improvement and Maintenance Alternative is also
recommended at West 82^nd^ Avenue. The additional benefit of the
100-year Conveyance alternative is removing the trailhead from the
floodplain. Since it is not feasible to assume the trailhead would be
heavily used during the 100-year event, removing the trailhead from the
floodplain is not a priority.

Blue Mountain Road is only access road for Blue Mountain Estates,
creating the need to provide access during the 100-year event. After
comparing the cost associated with each alternative, the Minimum
Crossing Improvement and Maintenance Plan was selected for Blue Mountain
Estates. This plan eliminates roadway overtopping at Blue Mountain
Estates, and the grouted boulder structure will ensure the majority of
the discharge overtopping the railroad will remain tributary to the
historic flow path in the Coal Creek Watershed.

The final design of elevating Blue Mountain Road should investigate any
impacts to the structures downstream of Blue Mountain Road.

<span id="_Toc420496925" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc431372727"
class="anchor"></span></span>Table ‑: Recommended Cost Estimate Summary

<span id="_Toc420496926" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc431372728"
class="anchor"></span></span>Table ‑: Jurisdictional Cost Estimate
Summary

6.2 Water Quality Impacts
-------------------------

There is no regional water quality improvements proposed for the Leyden
Creek watershed. New developments, such as Leyden Rock, and Leyden Ranch
West, will handle water quality on a site specific basis.

Eroding channel banks also can lead to degradation in water quality
throughout a watershed. By implementing the proposed stable channel
slopes, less erosion will occur, improving the water quality in the
watershed.

6.3 Operations and Maintenance
------------------------------

Culvert maintenance for all proposed improvements was assumed to occur
once every two years. Channel maintenance for proposed improved
channels, and all proposed hydraulic structures was assumed to be
performed once every five years.

6.4 Environmental and Safety Assessment
---------------------------------------

Implementation of the recommended plan will reduce flood hazards at
selected roadway crossings. These changes will also improve emergency
access during flood events. With exception to at 75^th^ Place, culvert
capacity up to the 100-year event has been provided.

ERO assessed the study area for potential wetlands and waters of the
U.S., threatened and endangered species, and general wildlife use. Below
is a summary of the resources found at the study area and
recommendations or future actions necessary based on the current site
conditions and federal, state, and local regulations. ERO’s entire
assessment can be found in *APPENDIX E – Wetland and Riparian
Inventory*.

#### 6.6.1 General: 

Although there are some regulated resources in the study area, none of
them are unique or regionally important. Aside from potential depletions
associated with new water bodies, ERO has not identified any significant
regulatory constraints on the proposed projects. Because of their
dynamic natures, site conditions and regulations should be reconfirmed
by a qualified consultant prior to conducting construction activities
within the watershed.

#### 6.6.2 Wetlands and Other Waters of the U.S.

Leyden Creek, most of its tributaries, and abutting wetlands are likely
waters of the U.S. Any activity in the proposed alternatives that would
require placing dredged or fill material into Leyden Creek, tributaries,
or wetlands must comply with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Many of
the activities in the proposed alternatives would provide a net benefit
to the stream, particularly reestablishing open reaches and grading the
channel.

#### 6.6.3 Threatened and Endangered Species

There is no suitable habitat present for any listed threatened or
endangered species, but depletions associated with new water bodies
would likely require consultation on potential depletions associated
with the water bodies and their potential effects on downstream
threatened and endangered species on the Platte River in Nebraska. If
construction activities are likely to take place outside of the Preble’s
Denver metro block clearance zone, it is recommended that a threatened
and endangered species letter to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service be
submitted.

#### 6.6.4 Migratory Birds and Other Wildlife

If any active nests are found in the study area, any work that would
destroy the nests should not be conducted until the birds have abandoned
the nests. If possible, ground-clearing activities should occur outside
of the April 1 through August 31 migratory bird breeding season. If
construction activities would occur during the migratory bird breeding
season, a nest survey should be conducted immediately prior to
construction.

Insert: DS here

<span id="_Ref410119101" class="anchor"><span id="_Ref410119094"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc416705176" class="anchor"><span
id="_Toc431372743" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span>Figure ‑:
Recommended Plan

Insert U/S here

Upstream recommended plan

